Fix Dynamic Attendee Categories So Newly Added Categories Like “Staff” Can Be Saved

We added a new attendee category:

Staff

through the new Attendee Category Rules / Categories system.

The category now appears in the Edit Attendee dropdown, but when trying to save it on an attendee, the update fails with:

Invalid attendee category: "STAFF"

This means the UI is now using the new dynamic category system, but the backend validation/save layer is still restricted to an old hard-coded allowed list such as:

PRACTITIONER

GOVERNMENT_NONPROFIT

SOLUTION_PROVIDER

So the frontend and configuration system have moved forward, but the attendee update endpoint and/or database validation has not.

We need to fully align the backend with the new admin-managed category system.

Primary Goal

Ensure that:

admin-created attendee categories like STAFF can be assigned to attendees

attendee updates accept configured dynamic categories

category validation is based on active configured categories, not a stale hard-coded enum

existing categories and reports continue to work

1. Remove Hard-Coded Category Validation From the Attendee Update Path
Current problem

The attendee update endpoint is rejecting:

STAFF

as invalid.

That means validation is likely still using:

a fixed enum

a Zod enum

a TypeScript enum

a switch statement

a database enum constraint

that only knows the original three categories.

Required fix

Update the attendee update validation so it no longer relies on a hard-coded category list.

Instead, category validity should come from the configured Attendee Categories records.

2. Validate Against Configured Active Category Keys

When an attendee is updated with:

attendee_category = STAFF

the backend should check whether STAFF exists as an active configured attendee category.

Required behavior

Validation logic should be:

load active attendee categories from configuration

compare the submitted category key against that set

accept it if it exists

reject only if it is not a configured category

This should apply to:

attendee edit/update

attendee create

Zapier import normalization

backfill tools

bulk imports if applicable

3. Check Whether the Database Column Is an Old Enum

The error may also be caused by the database schema itself.

Required check

Inspect the attendee table column for category.

If the column is a strict database enum with only old values such as:

PRACTITIONER

GOVERNMENT_NONPROFIT

SOLUTION_PROVIDER

then STAFF will always fail.

Required fix

If so, change the database storage model for attendee category from a restrictive enum to a flexible string/key field.

Recommended approach:

store the category key as text/varchar/string

validate against configured category definitions at the application layer

This is necessary if categories are now admin-managed and dynamic.

4. Keep Category Keys Normalized

The system should continue using normalized internal keys such as:

PRACTITIONER

GOVERNMENT_NONPROFIT

SOLUTION_PROVIDER

BANKER

STAFF

The dropdown can show labels like:

Practitioner

Government / Non-Profit

Solution Provider

Banker

Staff

But the stored value should remain the normalized key.

This is already the right pattern; we just need the backend/database to support it.

5. Update All Category Validation Layers, Not Just One

This problem may exist in multiple places.

Audit and update all category validation points:

frontend form submission schema

API request validator

service-layer validation

ORM/model validation

database schema constraints

import pipeline mapping

reporting/chart grouping logic

matchmaking filters

Do not fix only the edit form if other paths still reject new categories.

6. Ensure Dynamic Categories Work Everywhere

After fixing validation, newly added categories like STAFF should work consistently in:

Edit Attendee form

Attendee table Category column

Attendee detail view

Attendee category pie chart

category filtering

Zapier import mapping results

matchmaking logic where relevant

If a category is active and configured, the system should not treat it as invalid.

7. Decide How Dynamic Categories Affect Matchmaking

Not every category should necessarily be part of sponsor matchmaking priority.

Example:

STAFF likely should not be treated like Practitioner/Government/Solution Provider for sponsor discovery

Required behavior

Allow categories to exist operationally without forcing them into sponsor matchmaking priority logic.

Recommended future-safe approach:
add category metadata such as:

show_in_matchmaking = true/false

matchmaking_priority nullable

For now, at minimum, STAFF should save successfully and appear in attendee/admin reporting.

8. Update the Pie Chart / Reporting Labels to Accept Dynamic Categories

The attendee category pie chart and any category summaries should not assume only the original three categories.

If STAFF is assigned, it should appear as its own category in:

attendee breakdown chart

counts

filters

summaries

Do not drop or mislabel dynamic categories.

9. Improve the Error Message if Validation Fails Again

If a category truly is invalid, the error should be more helpful.

Instead of:

Invalid attendee category: "STAFF"

use something like:

Invalid attendee category. The selected category is not configured as an active attendee category.

But after this fix, STAFF should no longer produce an error if it exists in configuration.

10. Add a Migration / Backfill Safety Check

If existing attendee rows use old enum values, ensure the migration from enum to flexible string does not break old records.

Required behavior:

preserve all existing category values

allow new configured categories going forward

do not lose current attendee classifications

11. Acceptance Criteria

This is complete when:

adding a new category like Staff through Attendee Categories works

that category appears in the Edit Attendee dropdown

selecting Staff and saving the attendee succeeds

the attendee record stores the new category correctly

charts, filters, and displays tolerate dynamic categories

backend validation no longer rejects valid configured categories because of stale hard-coded logic

12. Success Standard

After this fix, Concierge should fully support admin-managed attendee categories as a dynamic system, rather than a partially dynamic UI layered on top of a hard-coded backend.

That is the standard this fix should meet.